docs: Document the current plugin API (#45)
wheelnext/pep_xxx_wheel_variants: docs/design/plugin_api.md

# Plugin API

## Purpose

This document describes the API used by variant provider plugins.
The plugins are a central point of the variant specification, defining
the valid metadata, and providing routines necessary to install
and build variants.

> The plugin API is defined using Python [Protocols](

Reviewer: Thanks, sounds good. Changed text is more explicit, so resolving this comment.

https://typing.python.org/en/latest/spec/protocol.html), as well
as textual description.

## Basic design

Every provider plugin operates within a single namespace. The namespace
is used as key for all plugin-related operations. All the properties
defined by the plugin are in the plugin's namespace, and the plugin
defines all the valid feature names and values within that namespace.

Within a single package, there can be only used plugin used for a given
namespace. Attempting to load a second plugin sharing the namespace

> must cause a fatal error. However, in the wider scope there can be

Author: All packages in existence. I suppose these words are unnecessary, and only create confusion.

using the namespace to exist, which implies that they become mutually
exclusive. For example, this could happen if a plugin becomes
unmaintained and needs to be forked into a new package.

Plugins are expected to be automatically installed into an isolated

> environment when installing packages, in order to facilitate variant

Reviewer: I'd leave out "into an isolated environment" here, because it makes it seem mandatory. Same as for the index configuration comment thread below: I'd leave this to the package manager. It can be an isolated install, a non-isolated install, or built into the package manager already for example.

Author: Done and done.

selection. Therefore, it is necessary that the packages providing

> plugins are installable with the same indices enabled that are used

Reviewer 2: I would leave index configuration to the package manager. There could e.g. be a company policy that packages can be installed from PyPI, but variant providers need to be installed from an internal index.

Author: Good point. Perhaps I should just leave the next sentence, i.e. that plugins for packages published on PyPI must be on PyPI as well?

Reviewer 2: The same situation already exists with packages and their dependencies as well as packages and their build backend, so I'd just elide this: The current practices apply as you'd expect. That is not to say that the current practices around indexes don't have a lot of confusing to bad behaviors too, but it doesn't change the situation from what we already have with build backend.

to install the package in question. In particular, packages published
to PyPI must not rely on plugins that need to be installed from other
indices.

Plugins are implemented using a Python class. Their API can be
accessed using two methods:

1. An explicit object reference, as the "plugin API" metadata.

> 2. An installed entry pointin the `variant_plugins` group. The name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. An installed entry point in the `variant_plugins` group. The name
```

```

## Plugin class

### Protocol

The plugin class must implement the following protocol:

```python
from abc import abstractmethod
from typing import Protocol
from typing import runtime_checkable

@runtime_checkable
class PluginType(Protocol):
    """A protocol for plugin classes"""

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def namespace(self) -> str:
        """Get provider namespace"""
        raise NotImplementedError

    @abstractmethod
    def get_all_configs(self) -> list[VariantFeatureConfigType]:
        """Get all configs for the plugin"""
        raise NotImplementedError

    @abstractmethod
    def get_supported_configs(self) -> list[VariantFeatureConfigType]:
        """Get supported configs for the current system"""
        raise NotImplementedError

    def get_build_setup(
        self, properties: list[VariantPropertyType]
    ) -> dict[str, list[str]]:
        """Get build variables for a variant made of specified properties"""
        return {}
```

### Properties

The plugin class must define a single property or attribute:

- `namespace` specifying the plugin's namespace

Example implementation:

```python
class MyPlugin:
    namespace = "example"
```

> ### `get_all_configs`

Reviewer 2: Does this always exist? To take an example already covered in the wheel tag, say a plugin determines the macOS version by reading `/System/Library/CoreServices/SystemVersion.plist`. The version can increase arbitrarily with new macOS releases. Providing `get_all_configs` would require updating the variant provider package with each macOS version, and an older version isn't forward-compatible with a newer mac.

Author: Yes, that's the current design. See e.g. https://github.com/wheelnext/provider-variant-x86-64/blob/e646ad845ee01f8270ebdc0166df3f16850cfa15/provider_variant_x86_64/plugin.py#L19-L95 and https://github.com/wheelnext/provider-variant-aarch64/blob/d995a2d5a38b1c40dda338bc4cd743e9112875ad/provider_variant_aarch64/plugin.py#L19-L72.

I have mixed feelings about this. On one hand, I see your point — and it is pretty annoying to have to update plugins whenever anything new comes up. On the other, allowing anything implies you may effectively start creating variants that no plugins will support.

In other words, the design was based on the assumption that for a new value to be used, the plugin needs to be updated first. In my example, this means that if you want to start building x86-64-v5 packages, then the x86-64 plugin needs to be updated first to recognize x86-64-v5 — and ideally you'd add an appropriate `>=` dependency to make sure that new enough plugin is used.

Are macOS versions backwards compatible? I.e. do executables built for `x.(y-1)` work on `x.y`? If so, then the plugin needs to be aware of all past versions that the variant will be compatible with — which (unless I'm missing something) implies that you can't really start using a new variant without updating the plugin to map the new version into all other versions it's compatible with.

Reviewer 2: macOS release are backwards compatible, in uv we match macOS 11 to [current major]: https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/blob/07f346f7230db5670827f90ab6aee61db30fd346/crates/uv-platform-tags/src/tags.rs#L525-L547

We could do the same in the variant provider, with the odd side effect that we may find a wheel outside that list.

    # example :: version :: v1 (less preferred)
    # (a wheel with no "example :: version" is the least preferred)
    #
    # the system does not support "example :: accelerated" at all

    def get_supported_configs(self) -> list[VariantFeatureConfig]:
        return [
            VariantFeatureConfig("version", ["v2", "v1"]),
        ]
```

### `get_build_setup`

Purpose: get build variables for the built variant

Required: no

Prototype:

```python
    def get_build_setup(
        self, properties: list[VariantPropertyType]
    ) -> dict[str, list[str]]:
        ...
```

This method is used to obtain "build variables" that are used
by the build backend to configure the build of a specific variant.
It is passed a list of variant properties, filtered to include only
these matching the namespace used by the plugin. It must return
a dictionary that maps build variable names into a list of string
values. If multiple plugins include the same variable, their values
are concatenated, in an undefined order.

The exact list of build variables and the meaning of their values
is out of the scope for this document. Build backends should ignore

> the values they do not recognize or support.

Reviewer 2: Does this assume a C compiler, and do we define any semantics here? With the default to ignore unknown value this sounds like a risky API, as a build backend can't ensure that it actually builds with the desired setup. If we're targeting compilers and linkers here, maybe we can have something more targeted, let's say a convention how to pass CFLAGS and CXXFLAGS?

With my Rust hat on, it would make sense add some words on C/C++ vs. Rust in handling such arguments.

Author: This is #23, and I've basically tried to describe the current demo implementation without being particularly married to anything about it. The way I see it, we really need to rethink how it's done — so I didn't want to put too much effort into documenting the current state.

Reviewer: Maybe add a comment here that this is going to change, linking to the issue? That avoids doing more work on this section right now, but makes it clear that this is about to change.
